hi everyone I'm back Laszlo Montgomery
here with CHP episode 2 for 2 thanks for
fitting me into your podcast listening
schedule part 2 this time in the
dramatic life of Kawashima Yoshi Co we
left off in part 1 with Yoshi ago making
this high profile break with her
adoptive father
Kawashima Naniwa cutting off all her
hair and making this announcement to all
her adoring fans and followers that
henceforth she was going to live her
life as a man women didn't get a fair
shake all her past unhappiness she
claimed was directly related to her
being a woman so from now on she would
style herself and live her life as a man
so let's see what happens by this time
in the late 1920s
besides being born at this tumultuous
time at the fall of the Qing Dynasty she
had grown up with this privileged but
utterly miserable and somewhat traumatic
childhood then she was cut off from her
family and sent to Japan and lived with
this ultra nationalist and peripatetic
behind-the-scenes spy and rabble rouser
Kawashima Naniwa she lived as part of
this household which saw a revolving
door of nanny was like minded freaks and
ghouls with their pugnacious talk that
and less than 20 years would lead to the
destruction of japan so she was on her
own in China now Naniwa went back to
japan and took Yoshi goes 14 year-old
niece back to massimo tow with him
Naniwa formally adopted her and wrote
her into the official registry as his
daughter which gave her Japanese
citizenship she was the anti Yoshi Co
everything she was not an entirely
normal and traditional girl for the
times who didn't disappoint Nani was
Yoshi ko did by this time
Naniwa had lost his hearing and this new
daughter called wrinkle became his ears
and chief means of communication Rinku
later on went back to China married a
local Chinese man for him six children
and lived in Beijing this niece of Yoshi
ko had a pleasant life until the end of
the war when she suffered the fate of
all Chinese
who were too friendly and cozy with the
Japanese and during the Cultural
Revolution she was denounced and
suffered again like so many millions of
others her own daughter was even refused
entry into the Red Guards because of
renko's unsavory class background much
later on renko's family made their way
back to Japan in the end but anyway back
in China
Yoshi ko threw herself into the
unwelcoming arms of her family after all
these years in Japan she had sorta lost
her Chinese language abilities and
didn't speak like a native and was
sometimes hard to communicate with and
as far as her finances went well she
wasn't exactly broke but she wasn't
living large either you know like a
princess ought to live and then out of
nowhere in November 1927 she announced
her engagement to this 24 year old scion
of a mongol independence leader named
Pablo job the boy's name was gonzo job
his father had been killed in 1916
fighting in his cause that well by the
way
Yoshi COEs father Prince su had funded
so there was a relationship with this
family in the couple's wedding photo
Yoshi COEs hair is all grown back and
she's wearing a traditional wedding gown
and very much looked like a traditional
Chinese bride the reception was held in
Liu Shan her younger sister jin-woo 9
years old at the time
attended the wedding she was the 17th
and youngest daughter of Prince Suh born
in 1918 which made her 11 years younger
than Yoshi Coe she just died in 2014 at
the age of 96 Yoshi Coe and Jean mo you
were sisters from the same mother the
fourth consort of Prince su she wrote a
book called I was born a Ching princess
like her sister she was educated in
Japanese schools later on jinwol you
will serve 15 years and PRC reeducation
camps because of her sister's infamy and
her own personal Japanese ties when
Chinmoy you was born
Yoshioka was already off in japan
studying this
stirrers met for the first time at this
wedding also present at the wedding were
a bunch of officers and heavies from the
Japanese Guangdong army
this included Kimoto Daisaku who was
said was in on the plot to blow up Chang
Celine's train the following year and
one of the more wilder stories Yoshi Co
was even connected tangentially with the
assassination of the old marshal to the
Japanese officers who are managing the
show in China and Manchuria a union such
as this one that saw the joining
together of a mongol groom and a manchu
bride with such a royal pedigree as
theirs and was something of great
interest imagine the possibilities japan
was itching to take over Manchuria and
inner mongolia and what better puppets
could there possibly be than these two
mongol and manchu thirst for
independence dovetail perfectly with
japan's plans in their homeland
so yoshi cojo and her new husband's
household and right away she was sorry
she got hitched Ganzer job quickly
joined the mongol independence army that
was now secretly being bankrolled by the
Japanese Kwantung army and the forces he
led fought against anyone who was
pointing their rifle in the direction of
the Japanese forces so he saw action
around the old province and around
chengdu north of Beijing so with her
husband gone all the time and totally
not digging the life of an oppressed
daughter-in-law after a few years
Yoshi Co was back to her old ways and
ditched the marriage once it had hit the
skids and her former husband gancho job
later on for all he had done fighting
for Japan's side ended up badly after
the war suffering the usual
collaborators fate imprisonment and
years and communists re-education camps
he was released just in time for the
famine that followed in the wake of the
Great Leap Forward policies and because
of his background he ended up going
through the shredder a second time
during the Cultural Revolution after
moving on from this unhappy marriage she
first went back to Japan for a short
stay and then made her way back to
fabulous Shanghai she dove headfirst
right into all the excitement
wicked splendor of the Shanghai jazz and
club scene from those glory years of
1920s and 30s we looked at this slice of
culture back in that whitey Smith
episode CHP 193 Kawashima Yoshi go
surely dance to his music and was a
regular at all the happening spots man
she knew how to party
but as she got herself acclimated to
this lifestyle her reputation had
already preceded her arrival and
depending on how you viewed it well she
had several things going against her a
reputation as a troublesome person
scandal with her adoptive father
Kawashima Naniwa their high profile
splits her recent divorce from Ganzer
job reflected badly and that she walked
around in men's clothing was well in the
Roaring Twenties perceived negatively
even on the more progressive streets of
Shanghai at 24 years of age she was
quite a celebrity but not in a good way
let me quote a 1931 excerpt from a
Japanese publication I'm lifting this
from Phyllis Birnbaum's book quote that
problem daughter of Prince Hsu Kawashima
Yoshi ko is now staying here in a
Chinese lodging the jung-hwa hotel she
meets with important people in the
Nationalist government and seems to be
in the process of planning something
when night falls she goes around to the
dance halls and seems to be soaking in
errata sysm at the same time she puts on
a show of saying that she's Joan of Arc
and is going to bring about a revival of
the Ching dynasty she's trying to meet
with who hon min who's at the center of
the anti Jon kai-shek movement her
activities have been carefully noted by
those important Chinese people with a
taste for the bizarre she is the very
incarnation of aratus ism and the
grotesque and gives off a strong taste
of a horror that her mental stability
has been questioned on top of that she
seems to be in financial trouble and has
a large unpaid bill at the hotel
end quote this is a theme pretty much
until she died
always needed money and go
and making an honest living wasn't an
option she would deer consider so she
needed they have backers all the time
who would allow her to maintain her
party-girl lifestyle and give her some
sort of purpose and there just happened
to be some organization that was very
familiar with her and all the propaganda
potential she provided and they were
loaded with money this was the Japanese
military in China the Guangdong army and
because of a relation with Prince su and
later with Naniwa and everyone already
knew of her but she was so strange and
unpredictable in her actions they just
didn't know how to use her so 1931
Seminole year if there ever was one in
Chinese history September 18 1931 JoePa
the Mukden incident you've heard that a
hundred times already Mukden was the
manchu word for the city of Shenyang and
Shenyang was where in 1626 nurhachi set
up his new imperial capital that would
later move to Beijing after the Ching
dynasty was established it had been John
Collins base of operations among many
other historic fun facts and there the
Japanese in order to expand their
Manchurian enterprise created an
incident that their propaganda machine
spun into a whole justification to take
over Manchuria from the republic of
china that area they acquired was less
than half the size of the Louisiana
Purchase but it was still ample enough
space for Japan to populate with
Japanese settlers and so it became this
dumping ground for settlers from an
overpopulated home nation and a
territory with this may Japanese
nationals was a perfect captive market
for Japanese goods so with this influx
of Japanese migrants into the Manchurian
provinces of li owning Heilongjiang and
gillian during this second half of 1931
no for someone like Yoshi ko it opened
up all kinds of potential opportunities
to exercise her passion projects for
Manchuria and look around for sources of
steady income let me quote from
sahi Shimbun again from Phyllis Byrne
bombs book quote departing for Dalian on
the ship Dyron motto in the drizzling
rain was a youth who wore an elegant
suit and a grey raincoat with a hunting
camp pulled down low over the eyes and
was surrounded by many Chinese people
this youth is actually the orphan of
Prince su who has changed herself into a
man and cuts a manly figure she is
seizing the opportunities offered by the
upheaval in Manchuria and Mongolia and
is now hurrying away to be part of the
new land that must be developed in the
home of her ancestors a region rich in
history as usual she had been spending
every night at the best dance halls in
Shanghai
sporting her new haircut and Western
clothes in the style of a modern girl
sometimes she came and went disguised as
a man always in the company of all sorts
of people along with her strange
behavior and deluxe lifestyle she brings
with her the air of someone with inside
information whose true persona is
impossible to pin down in the past there
have been various rumors about her in
Shanghai but during that time Yoshio
continued her behind-the-scenes doings
now in the wake of the Manchurian
incident there is the chance that a new
era will dawn in the birthplace of her
ancestors and so she is rushing off to
the north
she says that from now on she will
increasingly go about her activities as
a man and quote over the next several
years
Yoshio went through a string of lovers
male and female as always first was the
notorious Tanaka yokichi a name that
lives forever an infamy among the people
of China he was the one who laid around
in 1940 champion the three all's policy
in China Sun Guang jung-soo kill all
burn all loot all in the provinces where
this policy was carried out as
retribution for the damage Poong de
wises armies inflicted on Japanese
troops in China
Tanaka's scorched earth policy led to
the deaths of a few million people and
dragged
Don four years so this guy was the sort
of people Yoshi Co started to hang
around with more as I said in the early
days where father Prince soo and then
with Kawashima Naniwa she was often
surrounded by these military types
including many fanatics who were major
players now in the enterprise the
Japanese military was running in China
she was very comfortable around these
men and if she had even an ounce of fear
of them and she never showed it her
affair with Tanaka had begun in 1931 in
Shanghai Tanaka said was a little bit of
a sicko or had some serious fetishes one
being feminine domination and Yoshi ko
drove him nuts
he bought a love nest for them while he
served as the military attache for the
Japanese Legation in Shanghai and all
the while until she moved up to
Manchuria she had had a very torrid
relationship with Tenneco to yokichi
she needed his money and influence and
well he needed her to satisfy his
assorted perverted addictions he was a
pretty high up guy and she would just
humiliate him and show him all kinds of
disrespect in front of others and
nothing happened I mean this is what he
wanted and though it was an open secret
that she was his girl so to speak well
she would act very risque and in a very
promiscuous manner and make it look in
front of his peers that you know he was
wearing that humiliating green hat as
the old Chinese term goes by now It was
as if she knew she was in too deep with
his Japanese crowd and she might as well
go all the way just like Maggie Hans
Eastern Jul character in the last
Emperor and Tanaka had been the one who
carried water for Yoshio and went to the
higher-ups inside Japanese military
intelligence and said he had an
extremely useful potential asset in
place who could do wonders gathering
Intel on behalf of the Guangdong army
indeed it was a new era for Yoshii Co
yes
Canada's pride neil young won sang 24
and there's so much more now came the
part of her life that made her a legend
but again not necessarily in a good way
in the movie
if you recall Eastern jewel was tight
with her cousin the last Shing Emperor
Puyi who was living in exile in Tianjin
at the time and the centerpiece of
Japan's grand strategy in China was
going to be the establishment of the
state of Manchu Kuo pooey considering
his circumstances didn't have too
terribly much to lose back in early 1932
so despite having this discussed and
open enmity with his cousin Yoshi go
well he allowed himself to get talked
into accepting the position of head of
state to this new emerging puppet
government Japan was sitting up in
Manchuria Yoshi ko played a significant
role in doing what she could to persuade
pooi to go for it his wife however the
former Empress wan wrong played by Joan
Chen in the movie well she didn't want
to leave Tianjin for the cold dreary
northeast she was a very educated lady
spoke fluent English and quite a modern
woman in every sense and she saw through
this whole thing so kawashima yoshi KO
eastern jul well she was sent to Tianjin
to get close to the Empress Swan wrong
already hopelessly addicted to opium who
was only a year younger than Yoshi ko yo
she goes job was to convince one wrong
to pick up and join her husband in
Manchuria then what was to become the
new capital of Manchu quo in Chawan also
the present-day capital of Jilin
province now this act of prying one
wrong out of Tianjin and getting her
safely ensconced up in the future Manchu
Kuo imperial capital was only one of the
many stories attributed to Yoshi ko and
this one like every other one was
interlaced with myth legend and lies
embellished for posterity
amidst the organized riots going on in
Tianjin aimed at the Japanese
inhabitants living in the concession at
the time
Yoshioka was able to hustle the former
Empress one wrong into some Cuban maid
car and made a daring escape to the port
where they caught a cargo vessel that
took them north and after Yoshio
successfully took her up to Cheong hood
well the ampere
was miserable and like the Joan Chen
character in Last Emperor one wrong
would show up to public events and
stoned out of her mind and exhibited the
most shocking and unusual behavior and
being who she was and all her getting
access to opium was never a problem
until her horrible and tragic end
finally came the next major milestone in
the life of Kawashima Yoshika was the
shanghai incident in chinese it's known
as the ER Bosher bian the 128th incident
because it happened on january 28th in
the year 1932 and it lasted till March
3rd when Japan bulldoze their way into
Manchuria after the Mukden or Manchurian
incidents they had a public relations
nightmare on their hands all the Western
nations cried foul while they were
trying to fight off international
condemnation someone came up with a
brilliant idea to create a diversion and
move the focus of their efforts to
Shanghai they knew that we're gonna have
to control that place sooner or later so
now yo she goes lover tanaka okichi he
was involved in this whole plot and
claimed credit for it the plan was to
provoke an incident where by Chinese
hotheads would either murder or beat up
Japanese nationals inside the Shanghai
International Settlement and Tanaka
utilized Yoshi ko as his agent
provocateur handed her a fistful of
dollars and told her to spread it around
and give a taste to all her work our
friends lowlifes and toughs
and his instructions to her were to have
these guys go smash things up and
agitate against these Japanese not a
tough assignment for these provocateurs
one day conveniently there was this
procession of Japanese Buddhist monks on
the street chanting and banging drums
and they were set upon it got knocked
around real badly and one of these monks
died of his wounds one thing led to
another and things turned violent in
Japan had their excuse to go start
blowing things up and prior to this
action strikes had also been organized
against Japanese businesses and
the general mood on the street at that
time in early 1932 it was not very
welcoming
so with those mountains of ill-will that
already existed Along Came the Shanghai
or January twenty-eighth incident with
so much at stake in this largest
commercial city in China Japanese troops
started pouring into Shanghai and
Japanese gunboats were all over the Wong
Phu and Yangtze rivers with such an
overwhelming show of force the Chinese
military based around there wasn't in a
position to fight them so Chinese
authorities back down in the face of
such immense Japanese threats and on
January 28 1932 they signed off on all
Japanese demands but it was one thing to
sign a document it was another matter to
enforce the peace with all this palpable
anti-japanese sentiment remaining
manifested and continued strikes
boycotts and all kinds of disruptive
measures it all added up to a very toxic
state of affairs just like what Japan's
plan called for Japanese representatives
drew a line in the sand and said any
more incidents or violence will be met
with violence and call off those
boycotts - and to let everyone know how
they felt about all this resistance and
ill-will directed against them Japanese
warships parked offshore let loose a
barrage of missiles that just rained
down on Shanghai and Barbara Tuchman
still well in the American experience
she called this quote the first terror
bombing of a civilian population of an
era that was to become familiar with it
end quote
the first time civilians had ever seen
anything like this bombs raining down on
them that was something new and of
course quite commonplace today in 2020
after two days of relentless bombing
Zhang Kai shek temporarily moved the
capital from Nanjing to Lou young
farther north the battle between Chinese
forces and Japan was bravely being
fought by the 19th route army led by
their commander citing Kai
the opposing Chinese forces of the 19th
were outgunned and out man but despite
all that they caused some heavy damage
to the Japanese military foreign powers
stepped in and tried to broker a peace
but to no avail
well after more than a month of heavy
fighting by land sea and air the
Japanese with over a hundred thousand
pairs of boots on the ground in time war
the Chinese troops out a March 4th the
League of Nations got involved and were
able to hash out the Shanghai ceasefire
agreement that put an end to what was
another great leap forward in Japan's
acts of belligerence in China as far as
Kawashima Yoshi Co was concerned a star
was born word got around Japanese
military circles that she had done well
in provoking the Chinese on the streets
and she was given several nods of
approval for her value as a gatherer of
intelligence even from within the KMT
where she had many contacts and then
there was her regular attendance and
all-night schmoozing at the most
fashionable nightclubs in Shanghai
she had one hell of a rolodex filled
with many of the most golden names of
little Shanghai like with removing the
empress one wrong to Changchun it's
impossible to judge Yoshi goes exact
involvement in this January 28th
incidents all I could say is the
Kwantung army sure seemed pleased with
her so January 28th incident mission
accomplished and with everyone's sights
focused on Shanghai Japan on March 1st
1932 the day Charles Lindbergh's son was
kidnapped the Empire of Japan went and
established the new nation of men shook
whoa that sure raised a few eyebrows in
the international community in the lead
up to all this excitement in 1932 and
right after the establishment of manchu
quo the japanese writer buddha Matsu
shofu walked into Yoko's life upon
meeting her and learning what she was
all about he felt compelled to write a
book about her so more
sue was allowed into her strange bubble
and stayed in close quarters with Yoshio
for several months learning more and
more about her story as she told it
anyway and from this experience in early
1930s Shanghai he wrote a hot selling
novel based on her life entitled the
beauty and men's clothing Yoshi Co is
gonna be sorry she ever met this guy but
they asked for later on on the heels of
a sensational book on February 22nd 1933
the Asahi Shimbun featured the 26
year-old Kawashima Yoshi ko photographed
in a Japanese military uniform complete
with cap and boots up to her knees
seated and holding a sword this is the
quintessential historical photograph of
Yoshi go
Phyllis Birnbaum in her book Manchu
princess Japanese spy selected this
photo for the cover and if you look into
her eyes
nothing belies the weird and
extraordinary life that she had lived
thus far the article stated quote the
beauty in men's clothing
kawashima Yoshi ko is back to become the
commander of a vigilant score in waha
with heroism she will lead troops in the
suppression of bandits end quote the
article further went on to say that this
party girls wild and crazy days were
over and she was now fully dedicated to
protecting her ancestral homeland and to
mark this new beginning she took on a
new name of Jin beat weight and from
that point on in the English press they
often refer to her as commander Jin
essentially the propaganda ghouls and
the Guangdong army put her in charge of
this Potemkin battalion of toy soldiers
whose purpose was to keep an eye on all
the trouble spots in uh and snuff them
out before they spread through her was
spread out over parts of Hebei Liao Ning
and inner mongolia but who were these
bandits they were committed to
suppressing well they weren't bandits
they were Chinese resistance fighters
who were trying to push back against the
Japanese their Japanese propaganda or
made her out to be this protector of the
people
with these troops that she led valiantly
on horseback but but the truth was she
was helping the Japanese fight back
against the local Chinese she was
unwittingly playing against her own team
in Japan's attempts to pacify Manchuria
and Mongolia during the February 21
March 1 1933 battle of a big deal was
made about commander Jin's heroics
leading her troops on horseback and
throwing herself into the thick of
battle all of it could have been true or
none of it the reality was that the
guangdong army didn't actually need the
assistance of commander jean and her
merry men but a big deal was made about
the alleged contribution of this
regiment and it was milked for every
possible drop of propaganda value and
the propaganda machine described her in
1933 as this quote glittering Joan of
Arc in the bandits oppression army she
took a plane to northern Manchuria where
she played an active role everywhere and
with such deeds truly risked her life
for the sake of Manchu quo much like the
maid of Orleans Joan of Arc end quote
you know she was a piece a cork bobbing
and the crashing waves of the Japanese
military disinformation industrial
complex which was as much a precision
instrument as any Swiss watch and they
knew how to lay it on thick with the
fake news you know I was so sure I was
gonna be able to tell this story in two
parts but I think we're going to have to
finish up with Kawashima Yoshi ko next
episode in part 3 and you won't want to
miss that yeah I sure wouldn't let me
recommend the main source I've been
using for this episode it's called
Manchu princess Japanese spy the story
of Kawashima Yoshi ko the cross-dressing
spy who commanded her own army by
Phyllis Birnbaum Columbia University
Press the link is in the show notes if
you stay up all night wondering how can
you support the CHP well you have two
ways patreon.com slash china history
podcast get access to all kinds of
RACI bonus material and early access to
future CHP episodes or if you just want
to contribute one lump sum and be done
with it no there's the official CHP
PayPal donation center at PayPal dot me
slash China history podcast enter any
amount hit enter you'll have my eternal
gratitude merci beaucoup Mabel's I me
this is Laszlo Montgomery signing off
from the town of Los Angeles Aaron el
estado Dorado
once again beseeching you to come back
next time for another exciting episode
of a China history podcast